Adding copilot instructions (#2436)
microsoft/qsharp: vscode/resources/chat-instructions/openqasm.instructions.md

---
applyTo: "**/*.{qasm,inc,ipynb}"
---

# OpenQASM coding instructions

Follow these instructions when generating OpenQASM code in .qasm files.

## Syntax

OpenQASM has two versions: 2.0 and 3.0. The latest version is 3.0, which adds many new features.

OpenQASM 3.0 syntax is a superset of OpenQASM 2.0, so all OpenQASM 2.0 code is valid in OpenQASM 3.0.

> OpenQASM can include other files using the `include` statement. This is similar to C/C++ `#include` statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenQASM files can include other files using the `include` statement. This is similar to C/C++ `#include` directives: `include "stdgates.inc";`
```

OpenQASM 2.0 has two built-in gates being the one-qubit gate `U(θ, ϕ, λ)` and the two-qubit gate `CX`.

OpenQASM 3.0 has a built-in include file `"stdgates.inc"` which defines the standard library for OpenQASM 3.0 programs.
The `"stdgates.inc"` file in OpenQASM 3.0 defines the standard gates and operations: `p`, `x`, `y`, `z`, `h`, `s`, `sdg`, `t`, `tdg`, `sx`, `rx`, `ry`, `rz`, `cx`, `cy`, `cz`, `cp`, `crx`, `cry`, `crz`, `ch`, `swap`, `ccx`, `cswap`, and `cu`.
The `"stdgates.inc"` file also defines the following gates for OpenQASM 2.0 compatibility: `CX`, `phase`, `cphase`, `id`, `u1`, `u2` and `u3`.
OpenQASM 3.0 has two built-in gates being the one-qubit gate `U(θ, ϕ, λ)` and the zero-qubit gate `gphase(γ)`.

Only the built-in gates are allowed without including them from another file or defining them in the program.

## Setup and tools

The Quantum Development Kit (QDK) was re-written at the start of 2024 and no longer uses
the IQ# Jupyter kernel, or the `dotnet` command line tools. Job management is best handled
now via tool calls integration into GitHub Copilot, or via Python code using the `qsharp`
and `azure-quantum` packages.

> To execute OpenQASM code, use the provided tools.

Reviewer: This part seems unnecessary to me for QASM - it was originally written for Q# to "counter" the model's misconceptions about Q# gathered from training data. I doubt the same problem exists for OpenQASM.

Also, "use the provided tools" will not work since we have not yet defined and tools for QASM.

I'd take the whole thing out if it doesn't make a meaningful difference to behavior.

## Python interop

> The `qsharp` package provides a way to compile, run, and resource estimate OpenQASM 3.0 programs in Python.
> The functions can be imported from the `qsharp.openqasm` module and are named `compile`, `run`, and `estimate`.
> 
> OpenQASM 3.0 programs can be imported into Python using the `qsharp.openqasm.import_openqasm` function and accessed via the `qsharp.code` module.

Reviewer: Have you tried seeing how this behaves and if Copilot actually generates correct Python code? Also a code snippet may be worth a thousand words here.

```suggestion
The `qsharp` package provides a way to compile, run, and resource estimate OpenQASM 3.0 programs in Python. The functions can be imported from the `qsharp.openqasm` module and are named `compile`, `run`, and `estimate`.

OpenQASM 3.0 programs can be imported into Python using the `qsharp.openqasm.import_openqasm` function and accessed via the `qsharp.code` module: `qsharp.openqasm.import_openqasm("output bit c;", name="Foo"); qsharp.code.Foo()`
```
